Intel® Xeon® Scalable Processors
Skip To Main Content
The browser version you are using is not recommended for this site.
Please consider upgrading to the latest version of your browser by clicking one of the following links.
Safari
Chrome
Edge
Firefox
Intel® Xeon® Scalable Processors
Intel® Xeon® Scalable processors feature built-in accelerators for more performance-per-core and unmatched AI performance, with advanced security technologies for the most in-demand workload requirements—all while offering the greatest cloud choice and application portability.
Intel® Xeon® Scalable Processors
5th Gen Intel® Xeon® Processors
4th Gen Intel® Xeon® Processors
5th Gen Intel® Xeon® Processors
Get more performance per core, extended power efficiency, and TCO savings for more demanding workloads and enable advanced use cases that drive your competitive advantage.
4th Gen Intel® Xeon® Processors
Take on emerging AI, data analytics, networking, storage, and HPC workloads with performance powered by built-in accelerators and protected with advanced security technologies.
Built-in Acceleration for the Fastest-Growing Workloads
Intel® Accelerator Engines are purpose-built integrated accelerators on Intel® Xeon® Scalable processors that deliver performance and power efficiency advantages across today’s fastest-growing workloads.
1
Intel® Accelerator Engines
Explore the range of built-in accelerators and featured technologies that help the Intel® Xeon® Scalable processor optimize workload-specific performance, accelerate AI capabilities, reduce data center latency, reduce data bottlenecks, and balance resource consumption.
Intel® AI Engines
Intel® Analytics Engines
Intel® HPC Engines
Intel® Network Engines
Intel® Security Engines
Intel® Storage Engines
Where to Buy
Products featuring Intel® Xeon® Scalable processors and related products are available from our trusted ecosystem of vendors and OEMs.
See the list
Intel Insights
Sign up today for the Intel Insights newsletter and get updated weekly on the business technology topics that interest you most.
Sign up
Reach Out to Us for Pricing and Support
Contact Intel
Compare Products
Product and Performance Information
1
Availability of accelerators varies depending on SKU. Visit the
Intel Product Specifications page
for additional product details.
Get Help