What's New with VMware vSphere 7 Update 1 - VMware vSphere Blog
Share on:
Share on Twitter
Share on LinkedIn
Share on Facebook
Email this post
Ever since VMware Cloud Foundation with VMware Tanzu was announced in March of 2020, there has been tremendous interest in a single platform for traditional and modern applications.  While many customers are ready to deploy the full integrated software stack in VMware Cloud Foundation, many have also been asking us to deliver the capabilities of VMware Tanzu directly on VMware vSphere.  These customers may not be quite ready for the full stack, with existing investments in components of the stack that they want to leverage. Today, it gives us immense pleasure to share that VMware has announced vSphere 7 Update 1 to introduce VMware vSphere with VMware Tanzu and many other key innovations.
Video: High level overview of vSphere with Tanzu
What makes vSphere 7U1 one of the most anticipated releases of vSphere to date is the fact that customers can quickly modernize the 70 million+ workloads running on vSphere today. vSphere with Tanzu is the fastest way to get started with Kubernetes workloads on a developer-ready infrastructure. If you would like to learn more about the benefits and strategic importance of vSphere with Tanzu, please
visit our blog
written by our CTO Kit Colbert and Product Management executive Jared Rosoff.
In this blog, we will specifically cover the exciting innovations of vSphere 7U1 that enable customers to deliver a developer-ready infrastructure, scale without compromise, and simplify operations.
Deliver Developer-Ready Infrastructure
vSphere with Tanzu offers the ability to configure an enterprise-grade Kubernetes infrastructure leveraging your existing networking and storage in as little as an hour:
Tanzu Kubernetes Grid (TKG) service:
The TKG service allows IT admins to deploy and manage consistent, compliant and conformant Kubernetes runtime environments, while providing developers a simple, fast, self-service provisioning of Tanzu Kubernetes clusters in just a few minutes. TKG being conformant to upstream Kubernetes allows low-friction migration of a container-based application or development environment without refactoring.
Bring Your Own Networking:
Customers now have choice in the networks they would like to use for Tanzu Kubernetes clusters. One could use existing networking infrastructure with vSphere Distributed Switch (vDS) centralized interfaces to configure, monitor and administer switching access for VMs and Kubernetes workloads. Networking for Tanzu Kubernetes clusters now is more approachable than ever with the option of using vDS, yet this does not preclude customers from using NSX if they choose to do so. Also, Antrea delivers performance, portability and operations for internal networking of Tanzu Kubernetes Grid service
Bring Your Own Storage:
VMware has worked on deep integrations for storage in Kubernetes, to provide persistent storage volume management.  The best way to manage storage in vSphere with Tanzu is to use Storage Policy Based Management, a framework native to storage systems like vSAN and vVol, but for customers not using these capabilities the storage service can provide volumes using any existing block or file-based storage infrastructure.
Bring Your Own Load Balancer:
Choose your own L4 load balancing for Tanzu Kubernetes clusters. The first load balancing partner for VMware is HAProxy. While packaged in an OVA format for easy deploy and configuration, commercial support will be offered directly by HAProxy. This new support for different networking options builds a framework by which more partners will be made available in the future, to offer unprecedented choice in network options.
Application-focused management:
In the same fashion that IT admins can use vCenter Server tools to manage VMs they can now use vCenter to operate modern applications using namespaces as a unit of management. This is referred to as ‘application focused management’. Using application focused management, IT admins can use vCenter Server to observe and troubleshoot Tanzu Kubernetes clusters alongside VMs, implement role-based access and allocate capacity to developer teams.
For more details on vSphere with Tanzu, please return to the
vSphere blog
often – we will have a series of blogs and demos showcasing its use.  In the meantime, you can run your own trial of vSphere with Tanzu.  It is an inherent part of vSphere, allowing you to start your trial from any 7u1 installation in record time.
Scale Without Compromise
vSphere continues to deliver the ability to scale your infrastructure to meet the demands of high-performance applications and memory intensive databases including SAP HANA, Epic Operational Databases, InterSystems Caché and IRIS to name a few. Host limits were expanded in vSphere 7 to allow up to 768 CPUs and now with update 1 to support 24TB of RAM.  These new host limits allow unprecedented scale for VMs.
Monster VMs:
For customers running SAP HANA, Epic Operational Databases, InterSystems Caché and IRIS, VMware delivers industry leading scale through Monster VMs. With vSphere 7 Update 1, the Monster VM can scale up to 24TB memory and support up to 768 vCPUs, leaving other hypervisor vendors far behind in the category. Monster VMs support the large scale up environments by offering the full resources of a host to individual VMs. This scale was achieved by tuning up the ESXi scheduler and co-scheduling logic for large VMs, removing bottlenecks in vCPU sleep/wakeup paths and reducing memory overhead.
Cluster scale enhancements:
As Enterprises scale their cloud infrastructure footprint, the ability to have more hosts per vSphere cluster has never been more critical. With the vSphere 7U1 release, a vSphere cluster can now support a 50% higher number of hosts compared to the previous releases – up to 96 hosts per clusters. These capabilities allow customers to scale their infrastructure without compromise to meet the demands of modern applications.
Simplify Operations
vSphere Lifecycle Manager:
vSphere Lifecycle Manager (vLCM) was introduced in vSphere 7, and is now enhanced beyond offering LCM for just vSphere and vSAN hosts, extending to include installation and configuration of NSX-T. In vSphere 7 Update 1, vLCM will also monitor for desired image compliance continuously and enable simple remediation in the event of any compliance.
vSphere Ideas:
With every release, we continue to shape vSphere’s roadmap with our customer needs. vSphere Ideas is introduced in the latest release so that customers can submit feature requests right from the vSphere Client UI, track the status of the feature requests and look at all the other feature requests submitted by other users to vote for them. vSphere Ideas enables customers to engage and participate in building the roadmap for the product features, thus helping vSphere product teams build the features customers love.
vCenter Connect:
As customers scale their on-premises and off-premises cloud infrastructure, customers can manage their VMware Cloud on AWS or other Cloud partner offered vCenter with their on-premises vCenters in a single interface with any to any vCenter Connect capability.
Next Steps
We have keynotes, webcasts and sessions lined up with VMUG Boston UserCon on September 15
th
and VMworld 2020 is also around the corner. Register for free and attend both events to learn more.
Attend key events:
VMUG Boston UserCon (9/15):
Watch the Replay of Lee Caswell’s keynote: Modernize millions of workloads using VMware Cloud Platforms
VMware Webcast (9/15):
Up-Level to Developer-Ready Infrastructure
to see a LIVE showcase of this VMware vSphere 7 with Tanzu.
Register for VMworld
and immerse into the key sessions for vSphere 7U1.
Learn more:
Video:
A Quick Look at What’s New in vSphere 7 Update 1
Video:
vSphere with Tanzu Overview in 3 Minutes
Blog:
What’s New with VMware vSphere 7 Update 1
VMware vSphere with Tanzu webpage
eBook:
Deliver Developer-Ready Infrastructure Using vSphere with Tanzu
vSphere website
Follow the vSphere blog for more
vSphere Academy
VMUG webcast series
We are excited about these new releases and how vSphere is always improving to serve our customers and workloads better in the hybrid cloud. We will continue posting new technical and product information about
vSphere with Tanzu
&
vSphere 7 Update 1
on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays through the end of October 2020! Join us by following the blog directly using the
RSS feed
, on
Facebook
, and on
Twitter
, and by visiting our
YouTube channel
which has new videos about
vSphere 7 Update 1
, too. As always, thank you, and please stay safe.
Related Posts:
VMware vSphere+: Introducing The Enterprise Workload…
Announcing the launch of VMware Private AI:…
#vSphereCheer LinkedIn Giveaway – How do our vSphere…
Embracing Change with VMware vSphere Foundation
Announcing New Collaborations in VMware Private AI
Introducing vSphere 8: The Enterprise Workload Platform
Cloud Consumption Interface: Technical Overview
VMware to offer a Broad Multi-Cloud Portfolio of…
Don’t Miss These vSphere Sessions at VMware Explore 2022
Announcing the Initial Availability of VMware Cloud…
Announcing VMware Cloud Packs To Accelerate Your…
Announcing vSphere Q3 2023 Release
What’s New in vSphere Automation: Infrastructure as Code
What's New in vSphere Automation: vSphere SDKs
Related Articles
Technical
Join Us LIVE to Talk About Authentication & Identity in VMware vSphere 8
Bob Plankers
October 18, 2023
Technical
Join Us LIVE to Talk About Protecting Active Directory with VMware vSphere
Bob Plankers
October 9, 2023
Technical
Join Us LIVE to Talk About vSphere Security Hardening
Bob Plankers
October 4, 2023